---
title: "A Quick Calculation: 3D Rotation Matrix"
auth: Julia Kozak
layout: post
categories: [Math, Computer Science]
image: assets/img/3d.png
# my computer ... png ......
description: "Don't lie. This isn't computer science !!!!"
published: true
---

I recently thought of creating a (very simple) 3D graphics display in Processing. 

So I did that, and [here it is](https://github.com/jkozak30/3d-demo). Its current functionalities are placing points based on $$(x, y, z)$$ coordinates, connecting two points, and rotating around axes. The axes pass through a fixed point on the canvas, which is the center (labeled as the origin). It's a bit boring, but I really like the way I calculated the linear transformations for each rotation, so I'll explain them here.

#### Linear Transformations

So each time you rotate a 3D figure about a fixed axis, you're performing a linear transformation. To rotate a point $$(x, y, z)$$ about an axis (let's say, the $$z$$-axis), you essentially fix the $$z$$ coordinate, and map your point to its rotated image in the translated $$xy$$ plane. Within the $$3$$-space, angles and lengths are preserved, so your transformation is linear. Also note that the angles for each axis are stored as variables (and every $$\theta$$ is marked with a subscript for that axis).

And when this is displayed on the canvas, another transformation is performed. To give each point an $$x$$ and $$y$$ on the canvas, the figure is projected down onto the $$xy$$ plane and, in my case, scaled and translated for visibility.

Here's a transformation for a point with given x, y, z:
```java
(x, y, z) -> (  20*x+200,   20*y+200  )
```

Now, for rotations:

#### Rotation Time

We'll treat each point $$(x, y, z)$$ as independent, and say we want to rotate it about, first, the $$z$$-axis. What's good about this is that the $$z$$ coordinate is fixed, so we're essentially rotating within a translated $$xy$$ plane, where we can ignore the last coordinate. 

A useful fact is that rotation is a lot easier in the complex plane. Note that:

$$(a+bi)(\operatorname{cis}{\theta})$$

Rotates a complex number by $$\theta$$, so, for the purposes of calculation, we'll treat a point $$(x, y, z)$$ as $$x+iy$$, where the $$y$$-axis is now our imaginary axis. Now we can multiply:

$$(x+iy)(\operatorname{cis}{\theta_z}) = (x+iy)(\cos{\theta_z} + i\sin{\theta_z})$$

$$ = x\cos{\theta_z} + ix\sin{\theta_z} + iy\cos{\theta_z} - y\sin{\theta_z}$$

$$ = ( x\cos{\theta_z} - y\sin{\theta_z} ) + ( x\sin{\theta_z} + y\cos{\theta_z} )i$$

Separating real and imaginary parts gives us that:

$$(x, y, z) \mapsto ( x\cos{\theta_z} - y\sin{\theta_z}, x\sin{\theta_z} + y\cos{\theta_z}, z )$$

And we can do this again for the other two axes.

For y:

$$(x, y, z) \mapsto ( x\cos{\theta_y} + z\sin{\theta_y}, y, -x\sin{\theta_y} + z\cos{\theta_y})$$

For x:

$$(x, y, z) \mapsto ( x, y\cos{\theta_x} - z\sin{\theta_x}, y\sin{\theta_x} + z\cos{\theta_x} )$$

#### Matrix Notation

The matrix for these maps are then:

$$ X: \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 & 0\\ 0 & \cos{\theta_x} & -\sin{\theta_x}\\ 0 & \sin{\theta_x} & \cos{\theta_x} \end{bmatrix} \\ $$

$$ Y: \begin{bmatrix} \cos{\theta_y} & 0 & \sin{\theta_y}\\ 0 & 1 & 0\\ -\sin{\theta_y} & 0 & \cos{\theta_y} \end{bmatrix} \\ $$

$$ Z: \begin{bmatrix} \cos{\theta_z} & -\sin{\theta_z} & 0\\ \sin{\theta_z} & \cos{\theta_z} & 0\\ 0 & 0 & 1 \end{bmatrix} \\ $$

And we'll say the projection map for display is:

$$ P: \begin{bmatrix} 20 & 0 & 0 \\ 0 & 20 & 0 \end{bmatrix}$$

which is then translated.

So for vector $$\begin{bmatrix} x\\ y\\ z\end{bmatrix}$$, $$PZYX\begin{bmatrix} x\\ y\\ z\end{bmatrix} + \begin{bmatrix} 200 \\ 200\end{bmatrix}$$ is the transformation that the graphics display performs.